
--- Page 3 ---
Non-Newtonian Calculus
ºk
Michael Grossman
(Lowell Technological Institute)
Robert Katz
1972
Lee Press
Pigeon Cove, Massachusetts 01966
--- Page 4 ---
Non-Newtonian calculus [by] Michael Grossman (and,
Robert Katz. Pigeon Cove, Mass., Lee Press, 1972.
viii, 94 p. 23 cm.
1. Calculus. I. Katz, Robert, 1922– joint author.
II. Title.
QA303.G88 515 72–76466
ISBN0-912938–01–3 MARC
Library of Congress 72 [4]
Fourth Printing, July 1978
(C)
Copyright l972 by Michael Grossman and Robert Katz
All rights reserved
Manufactured in the United States of America
--- Page 5 ---
F o r e w o r d
We are pleased to present here the
results of our investigations into the
non-Newtonian calculi, which are mark
edly different from the classical cal
culus developed by Newton and Leibniz
three centuries ago.
Robert Katz
Michael Grossman
84 Main Street
Rockport, Massachusetts
December 14, 1971
This one
||||||||||||
RE-ND9
--- Page 6 ---
In the classical calculus the line is used as a stan
dard against which other curves are compared. In the
following remarks, Roger Joseph Boscovich (1711 - 1787)
may have been the only person to anticipate a fundamen
tal idea in non-Newtonian calculus: a nonlinear curve
may be used as a standard against which other curves
(including lines) can be compared.
“Butifsomemindverydifferentfromoursweretolookuponsome
property ofsome curved line aswe do on the evenness ofa straight
line, he would not recognize as such the evenness ofa straight line;
norwouldhearrangetheelementsofhisgeometryaccordingtothat
verydifferentsystem,andwouldinvestigatequiteotherrelationships
as I havesuggestedin my notes.
“We fashion our geometry on the properties of a straight line
because thatseemsto us to be the simplest ofall. But reallyall lines
that are continuous and of a uniform nature are just as simple as
one another. Another kind of mind which might form an equally
clearmentalperceptionofsomepropertyofanyoneofthesecurves,
as we do ofthe congruence ofa straight line, might believe these
curves to be the simplest of all, and from that property of these
curves build up the elements ofa very different geometry, referring
all other curves to that one,just as we compare them to a straight
line. Indeed, these minds, if they noticed and formed an extremely
clear perception ofsome property of, say, the parabola, would not
seek,asourgeometersdo,to rectifytheparabola,theywouldendea
vour,ifonemaycoin theexpression, toparabolifythestraight line.’
The quotation above appears in Dr. J. F. Scott's ar
ticle "Boscovich's Mathematics," which is one of nine
articles in Roger Joseph Boscovich, edited by Lancelot
Law Whyte and first published by George Allen & Unwin
in 1961.
--- Page 7 ---
P R E F A C E
In August of 1970 we constructed a comprehensive family
of calculi, which includes the classical calculus as well as
an infinite subfamily of non-Newtonian calculi that we had
constructed three years earlier.
Each calculus possesses the following:
a distinctive method of measuring changes in
function arguments;
a distinctive method of measuring changes in
function values;
four operators: a gradient (i.e., an average
rate of change), a derivative, a natural
average, and an integral;
a characteristic class of functions having a
constant derivative;
a Basic Theorem involving the gradient, deriv
ative, and natural average;
a Basic Problem whose solution motivates a sim
ple definition of the integral in terms of
the natural average;
and two Fundamental Theorems which reveal that
the derivative and integral are 'inversely'
related in an appropriate sense.
A popular method of creating a new mathematical system
is to vary the axioms of a known system. Although it may be
possible to axiomatize the classical calculus, we did not and
shall not pursue that course. Instead, in Chapter l we for
mulate the classical calculus in a novel manner that leads
naturally to the subsequent construction of the non-Newtonian
calculi.
In Chapters 2 - 4, we construct three specific non-New
tonian calculi: the geometric, anageometric, and bigeometric.
Chapter 5 is devoted to arithmetics (slightly specialized com—
plete ordered fields), which are used in subsequent chapters.
In Chapter 6 we simultaneously construct all the calculi, in
dicate the uniform relationships between the corresponding
operators of any two calculi, and provide suitable graphic
--- Page 8 ---
vi P r e f a c e
interpretations. Chapters 7 and 8 contain brief developments
of the quadratic, anaquadratic, biquadratic, harmonic, anahar
monic, and biharmonic calculi. (The harmonic calculus is not
to be confused with harmonic analysis.) Chapter 9 includes
a variety of heuristic guides for selecting gradients, deriv
atives, averages, and integrals. In Chapter 10 we discuss
certain generalized spaces, vectors, and least squares methods,
which were suggested by our work with the non-Newtonian calcu
li; we introduce a trend concept that may be considered as a
kind of global derivative; and we indicate some connections
between the non-Newtonian calculi and calculus in Banach
spaces. Sundry digressions and comments have been placed in
the Notes at the rear of the book; for example, in Note 2 we
explain how a simple algebraic identity suggested the possi
bility of constructing the geometric calculus.
Since this book is intended for a wide audience, includ
ing students, engineers, scientists, as well as mathematicians,
we have presented many details that would not appear in a re
search report and we have excluded all proofs. (All stated
results can be proved in a straightforward way.) It is as
sumed, of course, that the reader has a working knowledge of
the rudiments of classical calculus.
Finally we wish to express our gratitude to Professor
Dirk J. Struik for his interest and encouragement, and to
Messrs. Charles Rockland, Charles K. Wilkinson, and David J.
Liben for their helpful comments and assistance. However,
we alone are responsible for the form and content of this
book.
Criticism and suggestions are cordially invited.
M.G.
R.K.