
--- Page 9 ---
C O N T E N T S
Preliminaries, l
Chapter l; THE CLASSICAL CALCULUS
l.l Introduction, 3
2 The Classical Gradient, 3
3 The Classical Derivative, 4
4 The Arithmetic Average, 5
5 The Basic Theorem of Classical Calculus, 6
6 The Classical Integral, 7
7 The Fundamental Theorems of Classical Calculus, 8
Chapter 2: THE GEOMETRIC CALCULUS
2.l Introduction, 9
2 The Geometric Gradient, l0
3 The Geometric Derivative, ll
4 The Geometric Average, l2
.5 The Basic Theorem of Geometric Calculus, l:3
6 The Geometric Integral, lá
7 The Fundamental Theorems of Geometric Calculus, 16
8 Relationships to the Classical Calculus, l0
Chapter 3: THE ANAGEOMETRIC CALCULUS
3.l Introduction, 18
3.2 The Anageometric Gradient, l8
3.3 The Anageometric Derivative, l9
3.4 The Anageometric Average, 20
3.5 The Basic Theorem of Anageometric Calculus, 21
3.6 The Anageometric Integral, 22
3.7 The Fundamental Theorems of Anageometric Calculus, 23
3.8 Relationships to the Classical Calculus, 24
Chapter 4: THE BIGEOMETRIC CALCULUS
4.1 Introduction, 25
2 The Bigeometric Gradient, 25
3 The Bigeometric Derivative, 26
4 The Bigeometric Average, 27
.5 The Basic Theorem of Bigeometric Calculus, 28
6 The Bigeometric Integral, 29
7 The Fundamental Theorems of Bigeometric Calculus, 30
8 Relationships to the Classical Calculus, 31
Chapter 5: SYSTEMS OF ARITHMETIC
5.l Introduction, 32
5.2 Arithmetics, 32
5.3 O-Arithmetic, 33
5.4 Geometric Arithmetic, 36
Chapter 6: THE *-CALCULUS
6.l Introduction, 38
6.2 The *-Gradient, 39
6.3 The *-Derivative, 40
6.4 The *-Average, 41
vii
--- Page 10 ---
viii C O n tº e n tº S
6.5 The Basic Theorem of k-Calculus, 42
6.6 The *-Integral, 43
6.7 The Fundamental Theorems of k-Calculus, 44
6.8 Relationships to the Classical Calculus,44
6.9 Relationships Between Any Two Calculi, 45
6.lo Applications of Geometric Arithmetic, 47
6.ll Graphical Interpretations, 49
Chapter 7: THE QUADRATIC FAMILY OF CALCULI
7.l. The Quadratic Arithmetic, 52
7.2 The Quadratic Calculus, 53
7.3 The Anaquadratic Calculus, 55
7.4 The Biquadratic Calculus, 57
Chapter 8: THE HARMONIC FAMILY OF CALCULI
8.l. The Harmonic Arithmetic, 59
8.2 The Harmonic Calculus, 60
8.3 The Anaharmonic Calculus, 62
8.4 The Biharmonic Calculus, 64
Chapter 9: HEURISTICS
9.l Introduction, 66
9.2 Choosing Gradients and Derivatives, 66
9.3 Choosing Integrals, 68
9.4 Choosing Averages, 70
9.5 Constants and Scientific Concepts, 72
Chapter 10: COLLATERAL ISSUES
lC).l Introduction, 75
10.2 *-Space, 75
10.3 k-Vectors, 78
10.4 The *-Method of Least Squares, 78
10.5 Trends, 81
lo.6 Calculus in Banach Spaces, 82
10.7 Conclusion, 82
NOTES, 84
LIST OF SYMBOLS, 89
INDEX, 91
--- Page 11 ---
PRELIMINARIES
Since complex numbers are not used in this book, the
word "number" will mean real number. Except for f, g, and
h, lower-case Roman letters are used for referring to num
bers. The letter R denotes the set of all numbers, and the
symbol R+ denotes the set of all positive numbers.
If r < s, then the interval [r,s] is the set of all
numbers x such that r < x < s. (We do not use open inter
vals in this book.) The interior of [r,s] is obtained by
deleting r and s therefrom. The classical extent of [r,s]
is s - r. (Although the number s - r is usually called the
length of [r,s], we use the term "classical extent" in order
to achieve a uniform terminology for all the calculi.)
By a point we mean an ordered pair of numbers; by a
function we mean a set of points, each distinct two of which
have distinct first members. We use the letters f, g, h,
and occasionally others, for referring to functions, and we
usually identify a function with its graph, thereby avoid
ing undesirable circumlocution.
The domain of a function is the set of all its argu
ments (first members of the points); the range of a function
is the set of all its values (second members of the points).
A function is said to be on its domain, to be onto its range,
and to be defined at each of its arguments.
If every two distinct points of a function f have dis
‘inst
second members, then f is one-to-one and its inverse,
f , is the one-to-one function consisting of all points
(y,x) for which (x,y) is a point of f. Please bear in mind
that fºl is not the reciprocal of f.
A positive function is a function whose values are all
positive; a discrete function is a function that has only a
finite number of arguments.
A linear function is a function of the form mx + c,
where m and c are constants and x is unrestricted in R. An
especially important linear function is the identity func
tion, I, for which I(x) = x. (All linear functions are on
R.) The function exp assigns to each number x the number e”,
where e is the base of the natural logarithm function, ln,
l
--- Page 12 ---
2 Preliminaries
which is the inverse of exp.
In the sequel we shall introduce some new terms and
symbols, which, however, we have endeavored to keep to a
minimum.
--- Page 13 ---
Chapter l
THE CLASSICAL CALCULUS
1.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter we present some of the basic ideas of
the classical calculus in a novel manner that leads naturally
to the subsequent construction of the non-Newtonian calculi.
In the classical calculus, changes in function arguments
and values are measured by differences.
l.2 THE CLASSICAL GRADIENT
The classical change of a function f over [r,s] (or from
r to s) is the number f(s) - f(r).
A classically-uniform function is a function that is on
R, is continuous, and has the same classical change over any
two intervals of equal classical extent. Clearly every con
stant function on R is classically-uniform.
Since the classically-uniform functions turn out to be
the linear functions, we shall henceforth use the term "lin
ear function."
It is characteristic of a linear function that for each
arithmetic progression of arguments, the corresponding se
quence of values is also an arithmetic progression.
The classical slope of a linear function is its classi
cal change over any interval of classical extent l. Of
course, the classical slope of the function mx + c turns out
to be m.
The classical gradient of a function f over [r,s] is
the classical slope of the linear function containing the
points (r,f(r)) and (s,f(s)), and turns out to be
f(s) – f(r)
s - r -
There are several reasons why we decided to use the
British term "gradient" instead of "average rate of change"
or "rate of change": the first term is the shortest; the
second leaves us wondering of what it is the average; the
third is often taken to mean "instantaneous rate of change."
--- Page 14 ---
4 The Classical Calculus
There will be no confusion with the gradient concept in vec
tor analysis, since vector analysis is not treated in this
book.
Clearly the classical gradient is independent of the
origins used for measuring the magnitudes that the function
arguments and values may represent.
l.3 THE CLASSICAL DERIVATIVE
Throughout this section, f is assumed to be a function
defined at least on an interval containing the number a in
its interior.
If the following limit exists, we denote it by [Df] (a),
call it the classical derivative of f at a, and say that f
is classically differentiable at a:
f(x) – f(a)
1.im —
x+a x - a
The classical derivative of f, denoted by Df, is the
function that assigns to each number t the number [Df1 (t),
if it exists.
The operator D is additive and homogeneous:
D(f + g) = Df + Dg,
D(c. f.) = c-Df, c constant.
(We are intentionally avoiding the term "linear operator.")
In the classical calculus a distinctive role is played
by the linear functions, for only they possess classical de
rivatives that are constant on R.
Next we define a familiar concept in a special way that
will permit a suitable generalization in Section 6.3.
The classical tangent to a function f at the point
(a,f(a)) is the unique linear function g, if it exists,
which possesses the following two properties.
l. The linear function g contains (a,f(a)).
2. For each linear function h containing (a,f(a))
and distinct from g, there is a positive number
p such that for every number x in [a - p, a + pl
but distinct from a,
--- Page 15 ---
l.4 The Arithmetic Average 5
|g(x) - f(x)|| < |h(x) – f(x)|| .
Mr. Charles Rockland of Princeton University has proved
that [Df) (a) exists if and only if f has a classical tangent
at (a,f(a)), and that if [Df] (a) does exist, it equals the
classical slope of that classical tangent.
We say that two functions are classically tangent at a
common point if and only if they have the same classical tan
gent there.
1.4 THE ARITHMETIC AVERAGE
The arithmetic average of n numbers V1, . . . ,Vn is the
(v1 va)/n.
number + . . . *
In our treatment of classical calculus an important role
is played by the arithmetic average of a continuous function
on an interval, the definition of which will be simplified by
introducing the concept of an arithmetic partition of an in
terval.
An arithmetic partition of an interval [r,s] is any
arithmetic progression whose first and last terms are r and
s, respectively. An arithmetic partition is n-fold if it
has n terms.
The arithmetic average of a continuous function f on
[r,s] is denoted by
Mºf
and defined to be the limit of the convergent sequence whose
nth term is the arithmetic average of f(a1) . . . . ,f'(an), where
a1,. . . .a is the n-fold arithmetic partition of [r,s] .
n M.
The operator is additive and homogeneous:
M.s(f
+ g)
=— Mwaºsf
+
M.sg.,
M.s(c.f) c.Mºsf,
- C COnStant.
The arithmetic average of a linear function on [r,s] is
equal to the arithmetic average of its values at r and s, and
is equal to its value at the arithmetic average of r and s.
The arithmetic average is the only operator that has the
following three properties.
--- Page 16 ---
6 The Classical Calculus
l. For any interval [r,s] and any constant function
h(x) = b on [r,s],
Mºsh
-= b.
2. For any interval [r,s] and any functions f and g
that are continuous on [r,s], if f(x) < g(x) for
every number x in [r,s] , then
Mºsf
S.
M.sg.
3. For any numbers r,s,t such that r < s < t, and
any function f continuous on [r,t),
(s - r). Mºsf + (t s): Mºtf =- (t - r). MMt .. f.
1.5 THE BASIC THEOREM OF CLASSICAL CALCULUS
Our discussion of the Basic Theorem of Classical Cal
culus begins with its discrete analogue, which is a propo
sition that concerns discrete functions and appropriately
conveys the spirit of the theorem.
The Discrete Analogue of the
Basic Theorem of C1assical Calculus
Let h be a discrete function whose arguments
a1, .. . .an are an arithmetic partition of [r,s] .
Then the arithmetic average of the following
n – l classical gradients is equal to the
classical gradient of h over [r,s] :
h(ai)
h(*i-1)
-
i = 1, . . . ,n-l.
r
The Basic Theorem of C1assical Calculus
If Dh is continuous on [r,s], then its arithmetic
average on [r,s] equals the classical gradient of
h over [r,s] , that is
s h(s) – h(r)
M. (Dh)
= -.
s - r
In view of the preceding theorem we say that the arith
--- Page 17 ---
l.6 The Classical Integral 7
metic average fits naturally into the scheme of classical
calculus.
The Basic Theorem of Classical Calculus provides an
immediate solution to the following problem.
The Basic Problem of Classical Calculus
Suppose that the value of a function h is known at
an argument r, and suppose that f, the classical
derivative of h, is continuous and known at each
number in [r,s] . Find h(s).
Solution
By the Basic Theorem of Classical Calculus we have
h(s) – h(r)
Młf = Mº(Dh) = —.
r r
s - r
Solving for h(s), we get
h(s) = h(r) + (s = r). Mºf.
r). Mºf
The number (s - in the foregoing solution arises
with sufficient frequency to warrant a special name, which
is introduced in the next section and is justified by the en
suing discussion.
1.6 THE CLASSICAL INTEGRAL
The classical integral of a continuous function f on
by ſ
r). Mºf, s
[r,s] is the number (s - and is denoted f.
we set ſrf = 0. r
r
The classical integral is a weighted arithmetic average,
since
ſ" - ºtte
r) • f] .
r r
ſ
s
Furthermore, f equals the limit of the convergent sequence
r
kn' f(a1) kn' f(an-1),
whose nth term is the sum + . . . H where
a1, . . . .an is the n-fold arithmetic partition of [r,s] , and kn
is the common value of
a2 al, a3 a2. an *n-l
- - • * * * -