
--- Page 75 ---
8.4 The Biharmonic Calculus 65
D D
average of f on [r,s] equals
l
- *
−l ſ.s"_
s - r r D
D O ſ s
and the biharmonic integral of f on [r,s] , denoted by f,
equals Dr
l
ſ"s;_
r
All the operators of the biharmonic calculus are homo
geneous and harmonically additive.
The Basic Theorem of Biharmonic Calculus
BOf D D
If is biharmonically continuous on [r,s], then
oneD(r.5)D
its biharmonic average equals the bihar
monic gradient of f over [r,s] .
The First Fundamental Theorem of Biharmonic Calculus
D D
If f is biharmonically continuous on [r,s] , and
ſO
x G D
g(x) = f, for every number x in [r,s] ,
Dr
then
D D D
Dg = f', on [r,s] .
D
The Second Fundamental Theorem of Biharmonic Calculus
If D Dh is biharmoni-cally conti-nuous on O [r,sD ], then
D
ſO
s D
(gh) = h(s) E. h(r).
Gr
--- Page 76 ---
Chapter 9
H E U R I S T I C S
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Since it is not unreasonable to suppose that there are
situations where a non-Newtonian calculus might be useful,
we shall propose some guides that may be helpful in selec
ting appropriate gradients, derivatives, integrals, and av
erages. Of course, one is always free to use any operator
that is meaningful in a given context.
We continue to let # be an ordered pair of arbitrarily
chosen arithmetics, (A,4,-,8,7,8) and (B,*,*,3,7,8), with
generators o and 8, respectively.
9.2 CHOOSING GRADIENTS AND DERIVATIVES
Since the choice of a derivative tacitly involves a
choice of the related gradient, we shall restrict our atten
tion to gradients, for which three heuristic principles will
be offered.
Principle I
If the natural methods of measuring changes in
arguments and values are provided by o-differ
ences and 8-differences, respectively, then the
*-gradient may be appropriate.
For example, the classical gradient is appropriate for
analyzing motion because changes in time and position are
naturally measured by differences. The geometric gradient
is appropriate for analyzing stock-price movements because
changes in time and price are usually measured by differ
ences and geometric differences (i.e., ratios). The bigeo
metric gradient may be useful in psychophysics because
changes in stimulus and sensation are often measured by geo
metric differences. ("Equal stimulus ratios produce equal
sensation ratios," according to S.S. Stevens.)
Principle II
If the functional relationship between two magnitudes
would be, or is assumed to be, *-uniform under normal
66
--- Page 77 ---
9.2 Choosing Gradients and Derivatives 67
or ideal conditions, then the *-gradient may be
appropriate.
For example, the geometric gradient may be appropriate
for analyzing radioactive decay because the relationship of
mass to time is assumed to be geometrically-uniform (i.e.,
exponential) under ideal conditions. Similarly, the sigmoi—
dal gradient may be useful in the study of growth that is
normally sigmoidally-uniform (Note 4). The harmonic gradient
may be appropriate for analyzing the relationship between two
magnitudes that would normally be inversely proportional.
Finally we observe that another reason for using the classi
cal gradient in the study of motion is the assumption that
under ideal conditions, i.e., the absence of forces, the re
lationship of position to time would be linear (Newton's
First Law).
It is worth noting that each one-to-one function f on R
is *-uniform if one chooses o = I and 3 = f'. This implies
that each such function has a derivative that is constant
On R.
The statement of the third principle requires some pre
liminary definitions.
An a-translation is a function of the form x + k, where
k is a constant in A and x is unrestricted in A. For example,
the classical translations have the form x + k, and the qua
dratic translations have the form
t;2 2,172.
Each a-translation x + k transforms 3 to k and preserves
o-differences, that is, for any numbers u and v in A, the o
difference between u and v equals the o-difference between
the transforms of u and v. Therefore one may say that each
o-translation effects a shift in origin.
An O-similitude is a function of the form p 3 x, where
p is an o-positive constant and x is an arbitrary o-positive
number. Since each a-similitude p ≤ x transforms i to p and
preserves o-quotients, one may say that o-similitudes effect
a change in unit.
Of course, 8-translations and 8-similitudes are defined
--- Page 78 ---
68 Heuristics
similarly.
The classical similitudes are exp-translations, that is,
geometric translations. Indeed, every similitude is a trans
lation (each o-similitude is a Y-translation, where Y(x) =
a(e”)).
It is an important fact that the *-gradient (and *-de
rivative) is invariant under all o-translations of the argu
ments and all 8-translations of the values. For example, the
classical gradient is invariant under all classical transla
tions of arguments and of values, and the geometric gradient
is invariant under all classical translations of arguments
and all geometric translations of values.
Principle III
If one desires a gradient that is invariant under
all o-translations of arguments and all 8-transla
tions of values, then one should consider using
the *-gradient.
It is an interesting fact that the mixed second deriv
ative 5(D) is invariant under all classical translations and
classical similitudes of values, and 5(D) is invariant under
classical
all classical translations and similitudes of argu
ments and of values.
9.3 CHOOSING INTEGRALS
Suppose that a scientific proposition has been expressed
by a k-differential equation, that is, a differential equa
tion involving *-derivatives and perhaps related arithmetic
operations. To solve the equation one would certainly try
to use *-integration. If obtained, the solutions would at
first be expressed by means of *-integrals with variable up
per limits, which in turn would be evaluated in terms of
known functions or new functions defined for the purpose.
(Many functions were originally defined as classical inte
grals.) It is even conceivable that solutions in closed form
could be obtained for certain intractable classical differen
tial equations by re-expressing them with appropriate non
Newtonian derivatives and related arithmetic operations.
--- Page 79 ---
9.3 Choosing Integrals 69
A differential equation containing several types of de
rivatives can readily be transformed into an equation involv
ing only classical derivatives or only non-Newtonian deriva
tives of the same type. (See Sections 6.8 and 6.9.)
Integrals are also used for defining scientific concepts.
Consider, for example, the physicists' concept of work. If
the force f is constant, the work on the position interval
[r,s] is defined to be (s - r) •f, which we denote here by
w:f.
When f is constant the following conditions are clearly
satisfied.
1. Wººf = (s = r). f.
r
2. Work is monotonic increasing with respect to force.
3. Work is additive with respect to displacement; that
is, for any positions r,s,t such that r < s < t,
wºf + wif = wif.
Desiring to extend the concept of work to the case where
the force f is continuously variable, the physicist stipulates
that the extended work concept should satisfy Condition l when
f is constant and should satisfy Conditions 2 and 3 in general.
The solution is now uniquely determined; for according to Sec
tion l.6, the operator W satisfies those three conditions if
and only if W is the classical integral. Thus, the physicist
must adopt the following definition:
w; - ſºsf.
s
-
r
The foregoing well-known example illustrates the fact
that the characterization of the classical integral in Sec
tion l.6 is a heuristic guide for its appropriate use.
Now suppose that a scientist is concerned with a posi
tive magnitude g, called 'gorce, ' which may be continuously
variable with respect to time. If g is constant, he defines
the 'toil' on the time interval [r,s] to be gs-r, denoted by
Tºg.
(Somewhere we have seen such a concept, perhaps in eco
nomics.) When g is constant, the following conditions are
clearly satisfied.
--- Page 80 ---
70 Heuristics
l. T.sg = gs-r
-
2. Toil is monotonic increasing with respect to gorce.
3. Toil is multiplicative with respect to time; that
is, for any instants r,s,t such that r < s < t,
s t. — mt
T.g. Tºg T.g.
-
To extend the toil concept to the case where the gorce
g is continuously variable, we stipulate that the extended
toil concept should satisfy Condition 1 when g is constant
and should satisfy Conditions 2 and 3 in general. The solu
tion is now uniquely determined; for, according to Section
2.6, the operator T satisfies those three conditions if and
only if T is the geometric integral. Thus, we must adopt
the following definition:
ſ7’s
s
T.g
- r 9-
It should now be clear that the characterization of the
*-integral in Section 6.6 is a heuristic guide for the use
of integrals.
9.4 CHOOSING AVERAGES
Most of this section is devoted to 3-averages rather
than *-averages, since the choice of the latter depends pri
marily on how one would average finite sequences of values,
although the method of partitioning the argument intervals
is certainly a factor. (In contrast to the *-integral, the
*-average is not independent of the type of partitions used
for the domain.)
First let it be noted that our definition of the 8
average corresponds to a definition of the arithmetic aver
age of ul, . . . ,un as the number u such that
u + . . . F u - ul + . . . H *n -
-
n terms
Accordingly, the 3-average has the same properties relative
to 3-arithmetic as the arithmetic average has relative to
classical arithmetic. (One important illustration of that
--- Page 81 ---
9.4 Choosing Averages 71
fact is given near the end of Section 10.4.)
The predominant use of the arithmetic average may be
attributed, perhaps, to the custom of measuring deviations
by differences rather than by ratios or some other 8-differ
ence. However, any statistical justification for the use
of the arithmetic average relative to classical arithmetic
can be matched by a justification for the use of the 3-aver
age relative to 3-arithmetic.
Scientists often invoke a kind of "normalcy" principle
in choosing averages. For instance, it is commonly stated
that the geometric average is appropriate in the study of
those populations which normally increase in geometric pro
gression. This idea can be extended as follows: If under
normal or ideal conditions the measurements would be in 3
progression, then the 3-average may be appropriate.
Some scientists, notably the psychophysicist S.S.Ste
vens, favor the use of invariance principles for choosing av
erages. An interesting discussion may be found in the book
Basic Concepts of Measurement by Brian Ellis.
Now consider n measurements un ,. . . ,u, of magnitudes that
i. the measure
naturally combine by 8-sums; that of a com
bination of two or more magnitudes equals the 8-sum of their
individual measures. Surely, then, the 3-average of the ui
would be physically meaningful, though the arithmetic aver
age of the ui might well be physically meaningless. For in
stance, since the total resistance of n resistors connected
in parallel equals the harmonic sum of the individual resist
ances, one would expect their harmonic average to be physi
cally meaningful.
-
The intended use of an average is, of course, a basic
factor in its choice. Suppose, for example, that ul. . . . .un
are the measurements of one side of a square whose area is
to be estimated. The standard procedure is to square the
arithmetic average of the ui. But a different estimate of
the area is usually obtained if one computes the arithmetic
average of the squares of the ui. Although some consider
that to be no serious objection, it should be noted that the
geometric average always yields identical answers both ways.
--- Page 82 ---
72 Heuristics
The point here is that since the area is the square of a
side, one should seriously consider using a multiplicative
average rather than an additive average.
As is the case for integrals, a fundamental heuristic
guide for choosing averages is provided by the three charac
terizing properties stated at the end of Section 6.4.
In many situations, averages are intuitively more sat
isfying than integrals. Consider, for instance, a particle
moving rectilinearly with positive velocity v at time t. The
distance s traveled in the time interval [a,b] is given by
s - ſºbv.
a
Although the derivation of this result may be clear to a stu
dent, he may nevertheless find that the following formula
conveys a more immediate meaning:
a). Mºv;
s = (b -
a
that is, the distance traveled equals the product of the time
elapsed and the arithmetic average of the velocity. This
version is a direct extension of the case where v is constant.
Other examples will readily occur to the reader. (For the
last example of the preceding section, we may write
Msg)s—r
s
r r
a formula that is a direct extension of the case where g is
constant.)
9.5 CONSTANTS AND SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTS
In this section we illustrate the thesis that the inven
tion of a scientific concept may depend on the isolation or
discovery of a suitable constant. We also suggest that new
scientific concepts may arise from the constants provided by
the slopes of uniform functions.
Consider the concept of average speed. The definition
"distance traveled per unit time" is incomplete because it
fails to provide a method of determining the average speed
--- Page 83 ---
9.5 Constants and Scientific Concepts 73
of an accelerated particle. The definition "distance divided
by time," though not incorrect, is a gross oversimplification
that fails to reveal the underlying issues. Fortunately
there is a completely satisfactory definition, which was un
doubtedly known to Galileo.
Let us begin with Galileo's definition of uniform motion
as "one in which the distances traversed...during ANY equal
intervals of time are themselves equal." (Continuity of the
motion is tacitly intended here.) Then we isolate a constant
in each given uniform motion by defining speed to be the dis
tance traveled in any unit time interval. Finally, for a
particle that moves non-uniformly a distance d in time t, we
define the average speed to be the speed that a particle in
uniform motion must have in order to travel a distance d in
time t. In our opinion, neither the simplicity nor the obvi
ousness of the answer, d/t, justifies its use as the defini
tion of average speed.
The critical first step in defining average speed is the
isolation of the constant (speed) in the phenomenon of uniform
motion. Similarly, the critical step in defining the *-gra
dient is the identification of the constant (*-slope) in a
*-uniform function.
Wherever a scientific phenomenon (or idealized version
thereof) is describable by a k-uniform function, one automat
ically has a fundamental constant, the *-slope, which may
prove to be useful.
For example, in the idealized model of radioactive decay,
the relationship of mass to time is describable by a geomet
rically-uniform function whose geometric slope provides a
constant that is independent of the unit of mass and equals
l more than the percent change of the mass over any unit time
interval.
In the idealized model of the behavior of a gas, the re
lationship of pressure to volume, assuming temperature con
stant, is describable by a harmonically-uniform function
whose harmonic slope is a constant that equals the harmonic
change in pressure corresponding to a unit change in volume.